In the last lesson, we managed to use the Codable protocol to save our to-do list items into plist
and we were able to retrieve it and add new items as we pleased.
The next step is embark on a new journey and a new way of persisting our data. For this lesson and a
lot of the coming lessons, we're going to be diving into Core Data. And I'm going to walk you through
how we can perform all of the CRUD operations using Core Data.
But first, we need to learn how to set up and configure our Core Data DataModel in order to use it in
our projects.
Now, the first thing if you remember is that when we choose a template to create a new project, there's
this checkbox here that says Use Core Data.
Now, for our current project, I asked you not to check it because we were going to be looking into various
different methods of persisting our data before we come to this module.
So if we have a look, let's just create a CoreDataTest app and I'm going to check use Core Data,
and we're going to hit Next,
and I'm going to save it onto my desktop.
And don't worry about creating a git repository.
We're just gonna have a look at this test project to see what automatically gets created by Xcode
when you check that tick box. Now, the first thing that you notice that's different from your normal template
is that you get this Core Data DataM
odel. And inside here is where we set up all of our data and structure
it for use with Core Data.
The other thing that Xcode adds is inside the AppDelegate, it adds a whole bunch of helper code which
you're going to need every single time you use CoreData.
So they've just given it to you for free when you tick that checkbox.
So what are we going to do in our project?
Are we gonna have to rewrite it from scratch and tick that checkbox?
I mean there's a lot of cases when you make an app when you--and you don't know that you need to persist
your data using Core Data,
maybe, you know, initially, you thought, "Oh, it's gonna be a really small amount of data,
I'm just going to persist it using plist."
But then at some point, you realize that it's actually become this behemoth and you now need some sort
of formal DataModel manager.
So that's why we created this project Todoey without checking that use Core Data checkbox, so that
I can show you how you can add Core Data to any project even at a later date.
So the first thing that we're going to do is we're going to add that Core Data model.
We're going to go to File, New, File. And we've normally been playing around with this section which is
the source, but now, I want you to scroll down to the section that's called Core Data and we're going
to create a new Data Model, and hit Next.
Now, we're going to call this Data Model, DataModel.
I know it's not very imaginative, but it makes sense to most people.
And I'm going to drag it out of controllers and put it inside DataModel where it fits in much better.
Now, if we go back to that CoreDataTest app where we checked using Core Data, we can actually just simply
copy and paste all of this code up to and including applicationWillTerminate, and we can paste it into
our project.
So I'm going to delete applicationWillTerminate and I'm going to paste what we copied over instead.
Now, EXCO is going to complain because it doesn't know what persistent containers are unless we, of course,
import the CoreData framework.
And one thing we have to check to make sure is that the name here where it says the persistent container
name has to match with the name of our DataModel.
And if you remember, we called ours DataModel with a capital "D" and the capital ",."
so we have to make sure that when we copy this code over, that we have to change this to match our
"DataModel" name.
So, now at this point, our project for Todoey is exactly the same as if we checked that box to include
Core Data. So we can now close down this CoreDataTest project and we can delete it because we're not
going to need it anymore.
We've already gotten all the code that we got given from Xcode and we've incorporated it into our current
project.
Now, let's head over to our DataModel and we're going to create a new entity.
So you'll notice that when you start working with Core Data, it's almost like we're in a different world.
They use different words for things that we already have a good grasp of.
So, for example, entities are pretty much equivalent to classes, and each entity has a whole bunch of attributes,
and those attributes are almost like our properties that we've gotten used to.
But you can also consider that each entity is basically like a table of data.
So for every single Excel sheet that you have, you might have a single entity inside your Dore Data data
model.
So let's get started and we'll explain as we go along.
So we're gonna go over here and we're going to click on Add Entity which gives us this brand-new entity
and we're going to rename it to something that makes sense, rather than just Entity, right?
So you can do that either by clicking here or you can also just edit it in the attribute pane.
So, now inside our right-hand pane, you can see that we've got this new icon that looks to me a little
bit like a welding mask.
I don't know why it represents Core Data, but it just does.
So this is the pane under which we're going to edit all of our properties related to our entities and
our attributes.
And it's also here that we can change the name of our entity and we're going to call ours Item because
that's what this class or entity is going to represent.
It's going to represent individual items just as we did here using our class.
And if you look at our class, you can see that it has two properties which we now know are called attributes
in Core Data.
So we need to add these two attributes to our item entity and we do that by clicking this plus arrow
here.
So the first attribute, we're going to call title and the type of it is going to be String. In the attribute
pane,
there's this checkbox called Optional. And we want to make sure that each and every item must have a
title because, I mean, otherwise, what are you saving, right?
If an item doesn't even have a title.
Now, so we have to uncheck that box where it says Optional and make this a required attribute.
Now, there's other attributes to these entities that might be optional,
for example, like a due date for each item. But the title is not,
so let's go ahead and add that.
Now, the next thing that we're going to add is the done attribute and this is going to be a Boolean,
so we can select like that down here,
and we're going to make this attribute nonoptional as well.
So, now you can see that we've essentially replaced our Item class with our item entity and all of its
attributes.
So we can now safely delete our Item class and move it to Trash because we've essentially replaced what
it does using Core Data.
Now, there's one last thing that we need to do inside our DataModel inspector and that is to change
the module from global namespace to Current Product Module.
Now, this is something that probably won't break our project at this stage, but it's something to be aware
of
once your Core Data project gets more and more complicated, especially if your app requires multi-threading,
you might end up with weird errors if you don't select this as Current Product Module.
Now, the other thing that you'll notice here is that there is this property called Codegen.
And if you click on it, there's three options.
Now, let's go through what each does.
So the current and the default selection is called Class Definition, and what this does is that it converts
your data, your entities, and your attributes into classes and properties, so you can use them and manipulate
them just as you would if you had created a class with these properties.
Now, the slimy mysterious thing is that when Xcode automatically generates these classes, it doesn't
show up in our project navigator, so we can't actually view it unless we're really determined.
So if you are really determined to find it and have a look at it, then you can follow along with me.
Alternatively, you can just watch me show you where it is and trust that your code file is also automatically
being generated as long as you've got that Class Definition checked.
Now, in order to locate those files, all we have to do is head into Finder and we're going to navigate
right into the root.
So if you have difficulty finding your Macintosh hard drive, then all you have to do is just on any given
folder, hit command and hit the up arrow, and this will take you all the way up until you can no longer
go up any further,and you should be at your Macintosh HD which is your root. From here,
you're going to go into the Users folder, and then you're going to find your current logged in user
username, and then we're going to go into Library.
Now, if you don't see a library inside your Users folder, then all you have to do is just open up Terminal
and type  chflags nohidden ~/Library/ and hit enter and that will make your library folder
unhidden inside Finder. And inside Library, we're going to go to Developer, and then Xcode,
and DerivedData, and then in this folder, we're going to find our Todoey app.
So it should be called Todoey with a whole bunch of jumbled letters afterwards.
And here, we're going to look for a folder called Build. and inside Build, we're going to go into Intermediates,
and then Todoey.build, and then Debug, Todoey.build, and then we're going to go to DerivedSources.
And finally, CoreDataGenerated, and DataModel.
So it's a long path to chase down but, eventually, you get here.
And what do we find? We find three Swift files which is the name of your entity and Properties, and your
Item, and your Core Data class.
So if we double click on it, it should open inside Xcode, and we can have a look at what they look like.
So the two most important files that Xcode generates for you is your Item class and your Item properties.
So the Item class file gets generated once and it doesn't get modified unless you've deleted the entity
or you add a new entity.Bbut this file, the Core Data properties for your items,
this has regenerated many times.
So if you try to write any code in here, it seems to get wiped and replaced with whatever xcode wants
to put in here.
So these are both not good places for you to put your own code. If you wanted to put in your own custom
initializers or custom functions for your Item class, then instead of using the default which is class
definition, you'll want to use Categories/Extension. And if you have this selected, then you need
to create your classes that are identically named to your entities, and Xcode will automatically link
them up to allow you to use CoreData.
Now, the other option here is Manual/None where there is, literally, no cogeneration at all,
there's no linkages behind the scenes, and you have to do all the work yourself.
And this is probably the one that's least used in practice. And the class definition is probably the
one that's least effort, quickest to set up, and easiest to understand.
But the one that's actually most used, that you'll see in the wild is actually the category extension
because sometimes developers might want to add in some custom code, and so you'll see that used pretty
often.
But I would say that a lot of people do use Class Definition as well, just because it's so easy to implement.
And that's the one that we're going to use.
So if we have a look back at the Swift file where Xcode automatically generated this class declaration
for our Item entity, then you'll see that our Item entity inherits or subclasses NSManagedObjects.
An NSManagedObjects are basically Core Data model object.
It's similar but not quite the same as our standard objects, but by subclassing NSmanagedObject,
it allows us to manage this class using CoreData.
So if you do create your own custom classes and you go for the option of Categories/Extension,
then you'll also want to inherit from NSManagedObjects in order for your code to work.
So, now that we've seen the automatic code that gets generated behind the scenes, let's take a look at
the code that we got inside our AppDelegate.
So if you remember, this was the code that we copied and pasted from a new project that has the use code
data checkmark checked, and what we get is a global variable called persistentContainer, and also a
method called saveContext.
So I'm just gonna get rid of all of this commenting that Apple has meticulously added, just so that our
code is a little bit shorter and we can see it all on one page.
I'm also going to delete the comments inside applicationWillTerminate and I'm also going to delete
all of these methods excluding didFinishLaunchingOptions.
So, now you should--
So, now in your AppDelegate, you should have didFinishLaunchingWithOptions, as well as
applicationWillTerminate inside which you call self.saveContexts which is that method that Apple gave us
for free.
And we've also got this lazy variable code persistentContainer.
So the first question you might have is, "I've never seen this keyword before.
What does lazy do?
Well, you know how there's some people who if they need to get to work at 9:00, they'll wake up at 6:00.
You know, they'll spend half an hour doing yoga or some crazy stuff like that, and then do a whole bunch
of prep work, eat a proper breakfast. And those people are not lazy. But then there's another category
of people, myself included, which, you know, most people would categorize as lazy, and they're the sort of
person who if you need to be out the door by 8:30, you're probably wake up around 8:20, and try
to get everything done in 10 minutes, just so that you can have that extra hour of peaceful sleep.
So this is kind of similar to what lazy variables are. When we create a variable that we declare is lazy,
then it only gets loaded up with a value at the time point when it's needed, i.e., when you tried to use
this thing called persistentContainer that is when all of this code is going to run, and it's going to
have a value set.
So whereas the lazy person gets a lying benefit, the lazy variable gets a memory benefit.
So you're only occupying the memory when it's needed, rather than having everything set up beforehand.
So inside this lazy variable, we're creating a NSPersistentContainer
and this is basically where we are going to store all of our data.
And even though it's called an NSPersistentContainer, which sounds kind of fancy, it's actually going
to be a SQLite database.
So for those you guys who have worked with databases, SQL, SQLite, then this is basically what
the NSPersistentContainer is.
Now, the reason why it's called persistentContainer, and not just your SQLite database, is because
you can use different types of persistent containers.
So for example, you can use XML, instead of SQLite, but that's a whole other topic.
Just remember that your default persistent container is going to be a SQLite database.
Now, we create a constant called container that sets up this new persistent container with the name of
our DataModel,
and these two have to match so that all the behind-the-scenes setup and the relationships gets created
properly. And then we're going to load up this PersistentStore and we're going to log if there were
any errors. But if there weren't any errors, then we're going to return the container that we loaded up
and we're going to set it as the value of this lazy variable called persistentContainer. And we'll be
have to access it inside other classes in order to persist and save our data into our SQLite database.
Now, there's this other helper method called saveContext and this just provide some support to saving
our data when our application gets terminated.
But here, you see this thing called a context and we're going to look into the context a lot more later
on.
But essentially, the context is an area where you can change and update your data, so you can undo and
redo until you're happy with your data, and then you can save the data that's in your contacts or your
temporary area to the container which is for permanent storage.
So if you remember our lessons on Git and gGitHub, the context is similar to that staging area, that temporary
area where we can change things and update the things that we want to commit, and then only once we're
ready, do we actually commit the data to source control.
And in this case, it's exactly the same.
So the two things that you need to understand from this code is that we create a new
NSPersistentContainer using our CoreData DataModel. And this persistentContainer is the database that we're going
to be saving to
and as a SQLITE database. The second thing is that we have this thing called a context which is
what's called a scratch pad or a temporary area where you can update, change, delete your data until you're
happy with the format.
And then we basically commit it to permanent storage.
So these concepts are core to understanding Core Data and how it works.
So we're going to be revisiting it quite a few times.
So if you don't get it right now, don't worry, because I'm gonna be repeating the concepts here a few more
times until we get it.
So, now that we've seen how we can configure and set up Core Data to be used inside our Todoey project,
in the next lesson, we're going to look at the first letter of CRUD which is how do we create or how
do we save our data using Core Data.
So for all of that and more, see you on the next lesson.